---
layout: post
title: Cheating on WP with Statamic
feat_image: statamic.jpg
---
There are so many CMS' out there at the moment that we as developers are spoilt for choice, as much as I believe that certain CMS' are better than others, its all pretty much down to preference and what works for that current site.

At [Benchmark](http://www.benchmarkstudios.co.uk/) we build 99% of our sites in Wordpress for numerous reasons, one of the many is that it is open source and has a great development community behind it.

When I first came to build this site I did what I always do; fire up a new local .dev domain, download a fresh copy of WordPress , jump into phpmyadmin to setup a new db, go through the "Famous 5-Minute Install" and finally once all that is done, load up my standard boilerplate theme and start coding.

This is great when building large sites for clients that need lots of functionality and are not code savvy. But for this blog I wanted a nice simple engine that would leave enough flexibility for future modifications and one that didn't require me to work in a WYSISWYG editor to upload a post.

The problem I found with Wordpress was that I was spending more time in the back-end updating plugins and jumping around the menus than I was actually writing. As a developer I didn't feel I needed this level of hand holding that Wordpress provides, I'm a competent developer and will know the limitations of the site I'm building.

So I took a step back, put the blog on hold and pondered on it for a few months until one day as I was catching up on my Twitter feed when I saw a tweet from the the very talented Sarah Parmenter, talking about this new CMS called ["Statamic"](http://statamic.com/). I decided to take a look and while initially it was the photography and logo that caught my attention it was the product itself that had me hooked.

####Out with the database in with the Statamic
Statamic initially sells itself as a flexible but extremely powerful flat file CMS. Flat file CMS'* have been around for a while now with the most popular being [Jekyll](http://jekyllrb.com/) which you can find being at the core of [GitHub Pages](http://pages.github.com/). The main differentiator between Jekyll and Statamic is that the latter uses php rather than ruby to do the heavy lifting.

The basic premise for those who are wondering is really quite simple you have a basic folder structure that contains your site files(HTML, CSS and JS) not dissimilar to WordPress but a lot more stripped back and then rather than having a separate database, all of the written content is stored in files within a folder (with Statamic this is the `_content` folder). I could get into the more interesting details of how your content is then added into your template but instead I will just point you to the very well written [documentation](http://statamic.com/docs/how-statamic-works).

I like writing my posts in Markdown using iA Writer as it offers a distraction-free environment and as its an app I don't have to worry about losing the internet connection and having to start again. I would then add my finished posts to my content folder where I could view them on my .dev domain locally to make sure they look readable and any images are displaying correctly.

It's then just a case of uploading the folder to a web server and bingo thats all there is to it, no database uploading and no configuration of the site that can only happen on live. While you can do this by using good ol'fashioned ftp I have moved away from that and instead use a very easy deployment system that utilises GIT, I will be writing a blog post solely on this system over the next few weeks, so keep your eyes peeled.

Statamic is only $19 for a personal license (this is going up in 2013 to $29) and while some people may take issue with paying for software I believe it allows for focused development and allows for a brilliant support channel (software may work for free but people rarely can afford to) in which every time I have needed a hand they have gotten back to me within 30mins.

__Footnote:__ Just to let you know I'm in no way affiliated and don't receive any money from the guys at Statamic, I simply think there product is awesome.

__Corrections:__
- Static Site Generators and Flat File CMS' are different beasts but on occasion can be used to do the same thing.